22 Jan 2025
Dear Michael,
As you will see, the previous reviewers at Review Commons are now satisfied with the revised version and recommend acceptance. In addition, the additional reviewer with expertise in planar lipid bilayer electrophysiology considers the data and conclusions to be sufficient. While we do appreciate the very positive comments of the reviewers, after discussing them with the Academic Editor, who has a background in biochemistry, we agreed that the reviewers missed some essential controls and should be added to the study to confirm the conclusions. The Academic Editor's comments are pasted below (labelled 'Comments from the Academic Editor') and they would be required in order for us to consider the manuscript for publication. This includes providing additional control experiments and reporting details to ensure that the purified PEEL-1 and PMPL-1 proteins are fully characterized and that the currents are recorded using physiologically relevant conditions to avoid artifacts. 
*Published Peer Review*
Richard
------------------------------------
REVIEWS:
Reviewer #1 (Bruce A Hay, signs review): I appreciate the author comments and the changes to the discussion. 
My one minor comment in rereading the manuscript is in the beginning of the results. The authors say "Endogenous, sperm-delivered PEEL-1 is also
suppressed by pmpl-1 mutations (Fig. 1C), but not via a paternal-effect"
I think they mean "Killing by endogenous..."
Reviewer #2: I dont have further comments on the manuscript, which is appropriate to be published as a short discovery article.
Reviewer #3: The authors have addressed all concerns. I have no further issues.
Reviewer #4: I read the discussion and the revised manuscript. Unfortunately I m not an expert in the biological part so I will not comment on that. Concerning the electrophysiology I consider the data and the conclusion sufficient. Obviously a detailed study can be made but this would be study by its own. 
The cellular work shows pore forming activity and reconstitution in planar lipid bilayer a distribution of discrete conductances. As the overall study sounds very interesting I suggest to publish as it is. 
COMMENTS FROM THE ACADEMIC EDITOR
After carefully going over the manuscript again, I still have some concerns about the bilayer experiments. I think the authors should address these in their manuscript by providing appropriate control experiments and a better characterization of their data to provide stronger evidence that the observed currents in planar bilayers have equivalent properties to the currents measured in HEK-293 cells.
In light of the positive remarks of all four reviewers I regard the chance that the paper will be accepted as very high. I also do not think that it should be sent for re-review and that it could even be published without the bilayer data in case these turn out to be inconclusive.
The questions I have concerning protein expression, purification, reconstitution and bilayer recordings are as follows:
Protein expression and purification:
It was not confirmed that E. coli would be an appropriate overexpression system for both proteins, particularly since eukaryotic membrane proteins are only in exceptional cases functionally overexpressed in prokaryotic cells.
I also noticed that the authors extract their proteins after dounce-homogenization, which I do not regard as efficient in disrupting bacterial cells, followed by extraction in buffer containing 2% of the detergent Octyl-Glucoside. I thus wonder which fraction of the totally overexpressed proteins is captured in that way.
I also wonder why the authors record the absorbance at 260 and not 280 nm to estimate protein yields.
It would be helpful, if the authors would characterize their purified protein by size exclusion chromatography to estimate the oligomeric organization and dispersity of the sample and separate the fraction of the protein with appropriate oligomeric state from aggregates and incompletely assembled populations.
I think that this information is very important for several reasons:
1. Octyl glucoside is a comparably harsh detergent that is compatible with few stable membrane proteins (typically of prokaryotic origin) but that leads to aggregation in other cases.
2. The protein is expressed as MBP fusion, which tends to increase the solubility of misfolded membrane proteins and which was not cleaved off after purification.
3. Size exclusion chromatography could provide evidence for the proposed pentameric organization.
Bilayer recordings:
The authors should provide better evidence that the currents measured in their bilayer experiments have similar selectivity and current-voltage relationships as macroscopic currents. So far, the currents were only recorded at strongly positive voltages (180 mV) and at very high salt concentration (600 mM NaCl) and I do not know why the authors have decided for such drastic conditions.
I also wonder why these currents show the observed strong fluctuations and why they did not stabilize over time, particularly since macroscopic currents in Hek cells did not show a pronounced time dependence.
It would also be interesting to know whether the authors have observed stable macroscopic currents in their experiments that would facilitate the recording of meaningful current voltage relationships. If the spikes observed in Fig. 16 B, C would indeed correspond to the fusion of single vesicles with the bilayer, I would expect a constant current increase due to the incorporation of an increasing number of channels also in the recordings displayed in Fig. 16 D, E.
Comparisons of current voltage relationships and recordings in asymmetric ionic conditions would help to clarify these issues.
I regard these control experiments as essential since planar bilayer experiments are prone to artifacts and unfolded proteins have previously been shown to induce single-channel like properties.