
25 Jul 2022
PONE-D-22-11403Differential personality change earlier and later in the coronavirus pandemic in a longitudinal sample of adults in the United StatesPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Sutin,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
I recommend that it should be revised taking into account the changes requested by the reviewers. Since the requested changes include valuable comments, I would like to give you a chance to improve your manuscript.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Sep 08 2022 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
Baogui Xin, Ph.D.
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Reviewer #1: Major comments:
Overall, I find this article to be an important addition to the literature due to its ability to validate two previous studies with a larger and more representative sample of Americans, and its ability to complement the growing literature around other aspects of social and mental health impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. I find the methods to be strong, and clearly written, but could benefit from including additions as listed below. I found the discussion to be well written, and like the use of describing the phases of the pandemic as acute adjustment period, adaption phase, etc. I would encourage the authors to extend that terminology throughout the manuscript. Upon reading the entire manuscript, it seems as though there may have been multiple authors in the writing: the methods, results, and discussion sections were clear and well-written, but the introduction needs significant work to ensure clarity. A good edit by a single voice would benefit the manuscript.
Minor comments:
Abstract: If possible, please list the 5 personality traits assessed within the first 1-2 sentences. Since this journal hosts a broad range of topics, not all readers will be as familiar with these personality traits as the authors.
Introduction: Please provide additional context on the governmental policies and recommendations regarding COVID-19 that you feel may have impacted the personality traits you have assessed. There was wide variation across the world in these policies and recommendations, and brief description would benefit the reader.
Methods: Please include the anticipated ranges for the traits assessed within the BFI tool, and the directionality of scores (is higher indicating more or less neurotic trait? Etc.)
Table 1: Please include a more descriptive title for your table – tables should be able to stand on their own if ever used outside of the manuscript text.
Table 1: I believe “of” should be “or” in your third column heading (“mean (SD) OR % (n)”)
Table 1: consider plotting population averages of each personality trait on a figure to allow readers to quickly visualize potential change in population means across the time periods. It might also be helpful to include the years each wave was performed within the table or figure text (e.g. UAS1 (May 2014 – March 2018)).
Reviewer #2: Thank you for the opportunity to review this Interesting article entitled “Differential personality change earlier and later in the coronavirus pandemic in a longitudinal sample of adults in the United States“.
In this article, longitudinal data from the Understanding America Study (UAS) were used to examine personality changes at the beginning and later during the Covid-19 pandemic. Results indicate that there was a decrease in neuroticism at the beginning of the pandemic, but this was not present later in the pandemic. At this later time, however, there were decreases in the other four personality traits. In addition to these general trends, the authors also show that age plays a large role and that interactions with Hispanic/Latino ethnicity are present as well.
The article is written very well and in a comprehensible way. The authors make clear what they have studied, how they can explain their findings, and what the implications are. Overall, I think the article is already very good in its current form, however, I would like to make a few suggestions for changes. I hope that my comments can be helpful to the authors to further improve their work.
Introduction:
- The authors briefly state that there are few studies (2 are mentioned) on other collective stressful events and subsequent personality changes. I suggest specifying the results of these studies and relating them to the studies that were carried out during the Covid-19 pandemic.
- In addition, it is mentioned that personality aspects change by one tenth of a standard deviation in a decade. In my opinion, more could be said in the introduction about which changes are normal over certain periods of time and whether these changes concern all aspects of personality equally. As age becomes very important in the course of the article, I would also elaborate on how much personality changes in early, middle, and late adulthood. If there is literature on this, it could also be addressed which aspects of personality are particularly susceptible to change at which stages of life. This could then also be taken up in the discussion and compared with the results.
Materials and Methods
- I am not sure if I have understood this correctly. But I was surprised that with such a large sample there was only one measurement per person during Covid (either at the beginning or from 2021). I would recommend highlighting more clearly why it was not possible to have three measurements per individual (pre-pandemic, early pandemic and from 2021 onwards). The fact that they are not the same people at the beginning and later in the pandemic is mentioned once, but I would emphasize this more. In addition, I would recommend making comparisons between these two samples to show that they were comparable based on, for example, age, demographics, and baseline scores on personality aspects.
- Personality scale scores were calculated as sums. Since this could be problematic in case of missing values, I would recommend inserting a short statement about missing values or to use average values.
- I like that the authors give test-retest correlations. Since the article is about changes in these scales, it would be interesting to know whether these correlations differ in comparison to the validation study of the scale or other longitudinal studies on these peronality aspects.
- In my opinion, the choice of covariates should be briefly justified.
- It was not clear to me when reading how the interactions (with the exception of the different models for the three age groups) were calculated. Were they all included together in one model, or were there separate models per interaction?
Results:
- In Table 1, I recommend including not only the age range, but also the mean and standard deviation. In addition, I would indicate the range of years. Also, in this table I wondered why the personality scores were given for the three UAS waves and not for the time points relevant for the study (before the pandemic, from March 2020, from 2021).
- Regarding Table 2, I wondered why a linear effect of time was assumed. I recommend specifying whether, for example, quadratic or cubic trends were also tested. It would also be interesting to see a graph showing the fluctuations of each personality aspect over time, perhaps this would show some key moments where changes occurred and provide some possible further explanations of the results. In addition, I found it confusing that change over time was positive for Neuroticism, while changes toward Covid 2020 and Covid 2021+ were negative. Perhaps this was a typo or there is a simple explanation.
- Figure 1: To highlight which of the changes were significant, I suggest using asterisks.
Discussion:
- As very different effects were shown for the three age groups, I suggest briefly mentioning age effects in the first paragraph where the results are summarized.
- The decrease in neuroticism at the beginning of the pandemic could be discussed in more detail on page 17, perhaps with more than one possible explanation. In particular, the finding that this was especially true for older adults could be explained more precisely.
- In general, I would appreciate it if age differences in relation to the individual personality aspects could be elaborated in more detail.
- To understand the changes in the individual personality aspects, it might be worthwhile to take a closer look at the items of the scale used. It is possible that the changes are driven primarily by items that ask about behaviours that were not possible or allowed at certain times during the pandemic. For example, the item "Is a reliable worker" might not be answered well if someone can no longer work because of a curfew. Also, the items "is talkative"/” Is outgoing, sociable” could potentially be problematic, if asked during a national curfew.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********